
1. The passing of time; 

2. The tampering of facets of traces; 

3. The contamination of traces; and 

4. Insufficient knowledge of event traces 

The first point refers to the influence of time passing upon the facets of a trace remaining in the environment. Since an investigation starts after the event of interest occurred, it implies that a certain period passed between the time the event took place and the fixation of the crime scene. During this interval, the natural course of happenings (intrinsic events) impacts our ability to observe the facets resulting from the earlier event [8] (Gruber et al. [9] refer to this phenomenon as evidence dynamics). Intrinsic events may directly affect facets that can be observed, e.g., rolling logs overwriting facets; or indirectly, e.g., by affecting the environment in which they reside such as clocks drifting over time [10]. 

Tampering affects the facets of traces that were caused by events or other related events. To hide activities, an attacker or software (e.g., malware) may directly tamper with facets of traces, e.g., manipulating file timestamps or erasing files; or indirectly tamper with them by targeting the entire system (environment), e.g., by changing the system clock or attacking the Network Time Protocol (NTP). Note that tampering may also occur during the reconstruction process if the chain of custody is not correctly maintained, but this will not be our focus here. Palmbach and Breitinger [11] discussed various sources that can be found on the Windows operating system and concluded that none of the sources are reliable as they can be modified or deleted. Consequently, an (advanced) attacker may tamper with facets of traces which may lead to incomplete or out-of-order timelines. Eventually, this will impact the hypothesis creation of the investigator and in the worst case may lead to misinterpretations. 

Other subsequent events may also produce modifications of the environment, e.g., additional facets, after the initiation of the investigation process. Gruber et al. [9] refer to this phenomenon as the contamination of digital evidence (facets of traces in the newer terminology) and define it as being any inadvertent transfer of traits to an object of relevance at any point of the forensic process. An example of contamination, as given by the authors, may be failing to boot into a forensic live distribution at the acquisition stage, which would affect many timestamps. 

Finally, insufficient knowledge of traces from events is a challenge in multiple ways. Firstly, it is necessary to have experimental data to be able to generate a hypothesis as to what a pattern of timeline entries may suggest. There is then the problem that previous knowledge of traces generated by an event may now be incorrect on a new operating system, or even a new version of an application. For example, well-known references such as the SANS poster on NTFS time rules<sup>2</sup> may be outdated and may not consider application-specific deviations [12]. This can to some extent be mitigated through specific experiments related to the event that is trying to be inferred, but 

> 2https://www.sans.org/posters/windows-forensic-analysis/ 

2 

this is resource-intensive. However, additional limitations in knowledge will reduce the investigators ability to generate viable alternative hypotheses that would produce the same pattern of observed facets, and that cannot be so easily addressed via experiments. 

Overall, there are several problems to consider during the event reconstruction process, particularly when evaluating facets of traces in light of a certain number of hypotheses related to the event. While these problems may be well understood by some digital forensics practitioners and academics, their impact on the interpretation/reconstruction process is rarely discussed in published research. 

## 4. Towards assessing the tamper resistance of sources 

In addressing the tampering problem, research studies focused on the aspect of detection, i.e., through which means tampering of sources of facets may be detected by an investigator. Examples would be studies by [13] or [14] who concentrated on detecting timestamp manipulations. 

Palmbach and Breitinger [11] present an extended range of sources of facets that may be used to detect tampering of timestamps on Windows: the $USNjrnl, Prefetch and LNK files, Windows event logs, and the $LogFile. While these sources may contain substantial information, they may also be manipulated or deleted. In addition, these sources may be limited (e.g., fixed size) or unavailable on the system under investigation. 

In such situations, more niche techniques like digital stratigraphy, time anchors or hyper timelines may be used to detect time inconsistencies, e.g., backdating. Digital stratigraphy, as defined by Casey [15], is a method that takes advantage of the knowledge of file systems and the functioning of their allocation algorithms. By analysing the logical arrangement of files on a disk (e.g., as demonstrated in [16]), investigators can infer hypothetical events, provided they understand how the file system allocates and organizes those files. For instance, with the next fit strategy, a file created before another is usually positioned at a lower logical address on the disk than the latter. Thus, a file incorrectly ordered according to the functioning of the allocation algorithm may indicate that it was backdated [15, 17, 18]. Another concept is time anchors as discussed by [19] where an anchor is an artefact that contains two timestamps  one originating from the internal clock and one from an external source. If these timestamps do not match, this indicates tampering. A third approach is the concept of hyper timelines which focus on events without timestamps and focus on implicit timing information [20]. Inconsistency in implicit and exploit time information may also indicate tampering. For example, text-based log files are typically ordered by timestamp. If a timestamp is altered without the corresponding line being moved to maintain the correct order, it may indicate tampering. 

Experiments show that the probability of detecting tampering is high, especially when it concerns file metadata. For instance, it may be difficult for an attacker to forge a timestamp without causing subsequent inconsistencies that should be fixed as well [21, 22]. Similarly, Galhuber and Luh [12] highlight that timestamp forgery tools may modify timestamps in a detectable 

way, e.g., changing the accuracy of timestamps from nanoseconds to seconds. Additionally, only one of the tools they evaluated can modify the entire range of file system timestamps on Windows thus reducing the risks of being detected. On top of that, Andrade [23] highlights that the $FN timestamps are only modified by the Windows kernel and will generally go untouched by antiforensic timestomping tools. This provides another specific example where, during event reconstruction, one timestamp is more difficult to manipulate than another. 

Although there has been work on tampering in digital forensic investigations, none specifically relates to the general problem of event reconstruction. In addition, Neale [24] stresses the need to consider the reliability of facets, specifically in the context of tampering, and highlights that current research did not provide yet effective means to identify tampering. This paper aims to bridge that gap and explores the factors that could be used to formally evaluate the resistance to tampering. 

## 5. Factors 

From an examiners perspective, knowing about the resilience of sources of facets is essential when forming the hypothesis. Our results outline several factors that should be considered when assessing the resistance of sources. As this is a time-consuming process, it likely cannot be done for all sources but should at least be done for the most critical ones. The outcome of this process is a confidence. 

## 5.1. Factors to consider in evaluating tamper resistance 

We consider that each source of an observed facet (in our case sources of timeline entries) has a series of properties or factors that affect how resistant it is to active tampering. This is a combination of its intrinsic nature, e.g., the operating system or settings, in which the source resides. After reviewing sources of facets used for event reconstruction, seven common factors have been identified which are presented in the upcoming subsections. Each subsection includes a description, examples, and concludes with several categories within that particular factor. This is not exhaustive but has provided useful insight for the case study examples in Sec. 6. Future work may further refine these factors as more edge-case examples are identified. 

The use of these factors is a general concept. However, as will be seen later, in their current form as intentionally simple tables, they lend themselves to trying to improve the quality of results in mainstream investigations that do not have highly advanced attackers such as Advanced Persistent Threats (APTs). For these more challenging investigations, the factors presented are still relevant, but more resolution in the scoring would be needed, e.g., around advanced command line usage, and perhaps multiple iterations of evaluating tamper resistance. As an example, to score the presence of software that could be used for tampering, scoring is needed for the artefacts used to infer the presence of software. 

There are seven factors identified that can be considered when evaluating the resistance of a source to active tampering: Viability of source to user; permissions; software to edit 

3 

on system; observed facets of source access; encryption; and file format of the source; organization of the source. 

## 5.1.1. Visibility of the source to user 

This factor considers whether the source containing the digital forensic facet is visible to the user. For example, within Windows, a file on the users desktop (subject to custom hidden flags being set) is visible to a user. However, the file desktop.ini in the same location is not, which while not highly relevant for forensic investigations illustrates the example. Through a change within the Windows Explorer settings, this file can be made visible<sup>3</sup> . Therefore, two other categories of visibility are needed: Visible via user setting change (enabled) and Visible via user setting change (not enabled). There is also the possibility of viewing files via alternative mechanisms such as the terminal (ls -a) or Powershell (ls -Hidden) which also needs to be captured. 

There are additional challenges in evaluating this particular factor. For example, if we consider the Google Chrome Preferences file, which is normally located in the users home directory<sup>4</sup> . The folder AppData is by default not visible to a user, but the contents are visible (and also editable) via the Google Chrome interface, and therefore we should consider this trace to be user visible. However, the newer Firefox cache, again in a similar location<sup>5</sup> , is not visible by default. While Firefox itself does offer an interface to the cache via the UI (about:cache in the address bar), it provides no mechanism to edit the data. As a result, it should not be considered user visible. 

This leads us to several user visibility categories into which a source could fall: 

User visible via GUI 

User visible via other UI method (e.g., terminal) Visible via user setting change (enabled) Visible via user setting change (not enabled) Cannot be made visible 

## 5.1.2. Permissions 

Another factor to consider is whether permission exists to modify the source. In many systems, some users may have access to everything. Therefore, this consideration should be specific to a particular user and re-evaluated for different users. For example, on a Windows system, various operations are protected via User Account Control (UAC). The privileges to modify one source over another could be different. Again, taking the Chrome Preferences example, a user can access it without triggering the UAC interface. However, regarding protected files, on many system configurations the user is an Administrator on the system in question. Therefore, the UAC interface cannot be considered a barrier to accessing protected files as it only requires clicking Allow. On domain systems, however, the user of 

> 3Show hidden files, folders and drives, and Hide protected operating sys- 

> 4In .../AppData/Local/Google/Chrome/User Data/Default 

> 5In .../AppData/Local/Mozilla/Firefox/Profiles/xxx.defaultrelease 

a system may not be an administrator of the system and therefore, in the context of that user, manipulation of a privileged protected source should be considered as protected, e.g., access to another users Chrome preferences file. 

In specific, more advanced investigations involving intrusions on a system, another consideration is whether there are observed facets of privilege escalation (see Sec. 5.1.4). Suppose facets are found suggesting the use of an exploit to elevate a standard users privileges. In that case, files previously considered user inaccessible should be considered as if they are user accessible. 
